# Betzac: Software Requirements Specification

## 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Context

Betza notation was invented by Ralph Betza and extended by David Howe and others. Notably, the GNU software `xboard` has developed [its own version of betza notation](https://www.gnu.org/software/xboard/whats_new/rules/Betza.html) which this project's is based on. As a historical note, the `xboard` project has unfortunately gone unmaintained since 2014.

This project may also borrow ideas from Gregor Cramer's [Modified Betza Notation](https://ccif.sourceforge.net/modified-betza-notation.html), who has come up with many extensions and formalizations of Betza notation for his Chess Interchange Format.

This project is called `betzac`, which is short for _betza compiler_.

---

### 1.2 Outline

Section 1 offers a high level discussion of the scope of the `betzac` project.

Section 2 will describe the semantics of the compiler proper, including the declaration of _betza statements_.

Section 3 will describe what constitutes a valid or invalid betza expression for `betzac` (_betza expression_ thereafter).

Section 4 will describe the format of the intermediate representation (_IR_ thereafter) generated by `betzac`.

Section 5 will outline a standard prelude that should be intrisically accessible from any betza file.

Section 6 will describe the non functional requirements of `betzac`.

---

### 1.3 Defintions

The **betza language** is the collection of all valid sentences in betza notation. It is the language recognized by `betzac`. The betza language will be described in section 3.

A **betza expression** is a word in the betza language. At the simplest level, it is a string which encodes the moveset of a chess variant piece. What constitutes a valid betza expression and what does not will be described formally in [Section 3](#3-betza-expressions).

A **betza statement** is built from a betza expression. It is akin to a statement in programming languages. The primary function of a betza statement will be to label a betza expression. A more formal description will be made explicitly in this document (cf. [Section 2.3](#23-statements)).

A **betza directive** is a special metaconsideration applied to a betza statement (cf. [Section 2.4](#24-directives)).

A file in the **betza format**, or **betza file**, is a file containing a collection of betza directive and statements. By convention, a betza file will generally have the extension `.betza`, `.btz`, or `.b`.

The **betzac semantics** refers to the betza language — i.e. betza notation proper — _in addition to_ compiler semantics as will be described in [Section 2](#2-compiler-semantics), such as moveset definition, commenting, and more. The **compiler semantics** are all those constructs that are strictly part of the betza format but not the betza language.

A **betza object** is the artefact produced by `betzac` on a single betza statement, as part of a betza file. The format of the betza object is called the **betza intermediate representation** (**betza IR**).

A file containing betza objects is called a **betza object file**. By convention, a betza object file has the extension `.bo`.

In this document, a **source file** is a betza file being considered for compilation by `betzac`.

Finally, a **compilation target** is a source file for which certain betza statements will be compiled by `betzac` into betza objects.

---

### 1.4 Objectives

The goal of `betzac` is to accept as input a betza file and produce an object file. The point is that the IR should be efficiently and painlessly interpretable — moreso than a raw collection of betza expressions — by a computer program such as a chess engine or web app backend.

`betzac` is not expected to handle any information pertaining to game rules. And in fact it is expected **not to** handle such data. That is, the betza language should relate only to _geometric_ information or _movement_ information. A proper and explicit explanation of this will be offered in section 3.

---

## 2 Compiler Semantics

All following requirements are in relation to the `betzac` system. Unless otherwise stated, the logging behaviours that are explicitly described are defaults, and these may get changed via compilation flags (cf. [Section 2.6](#26-compilation-flags)).

### 2.1 Execution Model

2.1.1 - A source file is processed as a finite sequence of statements and directives in the order in which they appear in the file.

2.1.2 - At the statement and directive level, `betzac` will process strictly in lexical order (top to bottom).

2.1.3 - Any rule referring to the _first_ occurrence of a construct refers to the earliest occurrence in this order.

2.1.4 - The semantics of `betzac` are deterministic: given the same input files, flags, and file system accessibility, compilation will always produce the same logs and output.

2.1.5 - A construct that is ignored has no effect on label resolution, object generation, or further compilation semantics, but may still produce logs depending on active flags.

---

### 2.2 Error Reporting and Logging

2.2.1 - `betzac` will be able to produce logs during compilation.

2.2.2 - A log will be of info, warning, or error type.

2.2.3 - A log will have four conditionally required fields: a file, a line number, a cause, and a description.

2.2.4 - Every error or warning produced will include a corresponding cause field.

2.2.5 - Every error or warning produced and which is in relation to a particular file will specify the corresponding file in its file field.

2.2.6 - Every error or warning produced and which is in relation to a particular line will specify the corresponding line number in its line number field.

2.2.7 - Every error or warning produced and which is in relation to a particular line will specify a description in its description field, which will contain a relevant snippet of the source file.

2.2.8 - If no errors were produced, an info log will be produced to indicate success.

2.2.9 - `betzac` will terminate compilation immediately if an error log with cause `system` is produced.

---

### 2.3 Statements

2.3.1 - A well-formed statement will be of one of the four (4) following forms:

1. `label=expression;` (expression assignment)
2. `label=alias;` (alias)
3. `label;` (label resolving)
4. `expression;` (anonymous expression)

where `label` and `alias` are any valid labels and `expression` is any valid expression (cf. [Section 3](#3-betza-expressions)).

2.3.2 - During compilation, a statement which is not of one of these forms will produce an error log with cause `ill-formed statement`.

2.3.3 - If an alias or label resolving statement (cf. 2.3.1) is made before the label has been defined, compilation will produce an error log with cause `unresolved label`.

2.3.4 - A label will be of one of the following two (2) forms:

1. A single capital latin letter with no accent
2. `:value:`

In the `:value:` form, `value` is a nonempty string of latin alphanumeric characters or standard spaces which must not start nor end with a standard space, nor have repeated spaces.

2.3.5 - During compilation, a label which is not of one of these forms will produce an error log with cause `ill-formed label`.

2.3.6 - Whitespace characters that appear outside of a label (if applicable), including standard spaces, newlines, carriage returns, tabulations, and EOF will be ignored by `betzac` when parsing a statement.

2.3.7 - `betzac` will ignore label resolving, resp. anonymous expression statements (cf. 2.3.1) if they are not part of a directive.

2.3.7.1 - If the `-Wunused` flag is set, a warning log will be produced with cause `unused label`, resp. `unused expression`.

2.3.8 - If the `-Wunused` flag is set, `betzac` will produce a warning log whenever there is an alias statement with no directive keyword and which is not referenced in the file. That log will have cause `unused label`.

2.3.9 - A label is considered referenced if it is used in a statement, expression, or directive that requires its resolution. The label is considered unreferenced otherwise.

---

### 2.4 Directives

2.4.1 - There will be three (3) valid directive keywords: `export`, `using`, and `override`.

---

#### Export

2.4.2 - A syntactically valid `export` directive will have the form `export statement` where `statement` is any valid statement (cf. 2.3.1).

2.4.3 - A syntactically invalid `export` directive will produce an error log with cause `ill-formed directive`.

2.4.4 - Only statements that are part of an `export` directive in the compilation target produce betza objects.

2.4.5 - An `export` directive will expose a label to other source files.

2.4.6 - If the exported statement has a label, that label will be exposed.

2.4.7 - If the exported statement is an anonymous expression, it will be exposed with label `:expression:` where `expression` is the statement’s expression.

2.4.8 - An `export` directive whose statement has a label which has already been exported from the current file will be ignored by `betzac`.

2.4.8.1 - If the `-Wdirective` flag is set, `betzac` will produce a warning log with cause `duplicate directive` for each extra `export` statement having that label.

---

#### Scope

2.4.9 - The local scope of a source file will consist of all statements defined within that file.

2.4.10 - The exported scope of a source file will consist of all labels from statements that are part of an `export` directive.

2.4.11 - The imported scope of a source file will consist be the union of the exported scopes of all source files that it references via `using` directives.

2.4.12 - The effective scope of a source file will be the union of its local scope and imported scope.

2.4.13 - When multiple labels with the same name exist in the effective scope, label resolution priority rules (cf. 2.4.23–2.4.25) will apply.

2.4.14 - The imported scope will not be transitive beyond exported labels; only explicitly exported labels will be visible.

---

#### Using

2.4.15 - A syntactically valid `using` directive will have the form `using filename` where filename is a path relative to the workspace directory.

2.4.16 - A syntactically invalid `using` directive will produce an error log with cause `ill-formed directive`.

2.4.17 - A semantically valid `using` directive will have a filename which resolves to a source file (cf. 2.5.1.2).

2.4.18 - An syntactically valid `using` directive whose filename does not resolve to a source file will produce an error log with cause `using unknown`.

2.4.19 - A `using` directive for a file which depends on the current file (because it directly uses it, or because it uses a file which uses it, etc.) will produce an error log with cause `using circular`.

2.4.20 - A `using` directive for a filename that is already part of a `using` directive in the local scope will be ignored by `betzac`.

2.4.20.1 - If the `-Wdirective` flag is set, `betzac` will produce a warning log with cause `duplicate directive`.

2.4.21 - A `using` directive will make the exported scope of its `filename` source file available in the current file's imported scope.

---

#### Override

2.4.22 - A syntactically valid `override` directive will have the form `override statement` or `override directive` where `statement` is a valid statement (cf. 2.3.1) and `directive` is a non `override` directive.

2.4.22.1 - A syntactically invalid `override` directive will produce an error log with cause `ill-formed directive`.

2.4.23 - If there is an `override using filename` directive, then every statement exported from the corresponding source file is considered as though it were part of an override directive **in the local scope** (cf. 2.4.23-2.4.25).

---

#### Label Resolution Priority

2.4.24 - For each label in the effective scope, `betzac` will select exactly one defining statement according to the following priority rules:

1. Definitions that are part of an override directive take precedence over those that are not.
2. Among definitions of equal precedence, the earliest definition in lexical order is selected.

2.4.25 - All non-selected definitions for that label are ignored.

2.4.26 - If the `-Wunused` flag is set, a warning with cause duplicate label will be produced for each ignored definition.

2.4.26.1 - Warnings for ignored definitions originating from the imported scope will be suppressed when the selected definition is part of an override directive.

---

### 2.5 Compilation Data

The main function of `betzac` is to compile betza files into betza objects. This subsection explains what data must be input into `betzac` to execute the compilation process specifically.

2.5.1 - To compile, `betzac` will **require** exactly one target source file.

2.5.2 - If compilation is successful, `betzac` will produce exactly one betza object per statement in the exported scope, all of them written collectively into a single betza object file.

2.5.3 - If at least one error log was produced during compilation, `betzac` will not produce any object files.

---

#### Workspace

2.5.4 - `betzac` will optionally accept a workspace directory.

2.5.4.1 - If a workspace directory is not specified, `betzac` will set it to the directory containing the compilation target.

2.5.5 - `betzac` will attempt to resolve `using` directives (cf. [Section 2.4](#24-directives)) relative to the workspace directory.

2.5.6 - If the workspace directory cannot be resolved or does not exist, `betzac` will terminate compilation and produce an error log with cause `system`.

---

#### Output

2.5.7 - `betzac` will optionally accept an output path.

2.5.8 - `betzac` will resolve an output **location**, which is where the betza object file will be produced.

2.5.9 - If an output path is specified, the output location will be resolved according to these rules:

1. If the output path is `-`, then the output location will be standard output (`stdout`);
2. Else if the output path is absolute, the output location is set to the output path as is;
3. Otherwise, the output location is resolved from the output path relative to the workspace directory.

2.5.10 - If an output path is not specified, the output location will be set to the the target source file's location with the extension replaced by `.bo`.

2.5.10.1 - If the target source file has no extension, `.bo` will be appended to its filename instead.

2.5.11 - `betzac` will ensure its output location is writeable.

2.5.11.1 - If the output location is `stdout`, no file system operations (creation or overwrite) will be performed.

2.5.11.2 - Otherwise, `betzac` will create a file at its output location if it does not exist yet, or overwrite the file at its output location if it already exists.

2.5.12 - If the output location cannot be written to, `betzac` will produce an error log with cause `system`.

2.5.13 - If at any point during compilation, a source file resolves to the output location, `betzac` will produce an error log with cause `system`.

2.5.14 - `betzac` will perform write operations on its output file only one single time, at a point in its internal process where no further semantic or syntactic analysis or mutation will be performed.

2.5.15 - Future versions of `betzac` may support multiple output files. In such cases, the meaning of output path may be extended.

---

#### Logging

2.5.16 - `betzac` will optionally accept a log destination file.

2.5.16.1 - If a log destination file is specified, all logs will be written exclusively to that file.

2.5.16.2 - If a log destination file is not specified, all logs will be written exclusively to standard error (`stderr`) of the invoking process.

2.5.17 - The log destination file will be resolved relative to the workspace directory if the path is not absolute.

2.5.17.1 - Otherwise, `betzac` will attempt to resolve the log destination file relative to the file system's root.

2.5.18 - `betzac` will append the logs it produces at the end of the file it logs to.

2.5.19 - If the log location cannot be created or written to, `betzac` will attempt to produce a warning log to standard error (`stderr`) of its invoking process with cause `system`.

2.5.19.1 - If the fallback to `stderr` is successful, the logging destination for the compilation run will be set to `stderr` and compilation will continue as normal from there.

2.5.19.2 - If the fallback to `stderr` is not successful, `betzac` will terminate compilation immediately. It will exceptionally not create logs, since the error is related to the impossibility of logging.

---

2.5.20 - Any number of compilation flags may be optionally passed to `betzac` to modify its behaviour.

---

### 2.6 Compilation Flags

2.6.1 - A `-w` flag may be passed to `betzac` to suppress all warnings at compilation.

2.6.2 - A `-Werror` flag may be passed to `betzac` to turn all warnings into errors at compilation.

2.6.3 - A `-Werror=specifier` flag may be passed to `betzac` to turn all warnings controlled by the flag `specifier` into errors at compilation. For example, `-Werror=unused` turns the warnings controlled by `-Wunused` into errors.

2.6.3.1 - Flags with no stated specifier cannot be passed to the `-Werror=` flag.

2.6.4 - The `-Werror=` flag may be passed more than one time with different arguments. This will have the effect of turning the warnings controlled by all the specifiers into errors at compilation.

2.6.4.1 - If a specifier is used more than once as an argument to the `-Werror=` flag, it will have no effect.

2.6.5 - The `-Wfatal-errors` flag may be passed to `betzac` to terminate compilation immediately when the first error log is produced.

2.6.6 - A `-Wunused` flag may be passed to `betzac` to produce warning logs when a statement is ignored during compilation. This flag has specifier `unused`.

2.6.7 - A `-Wdirective` flag may be passed to `betzac` to produce warning logs when a duplicate directive is identified during compilation. This flag has specifier `directive`.

2.6.8 - A `-Wlang` flag may be passed to `betzac` to produce warning logs when a non fatal betza language issue is detected (cf. [Section 3](#3-betza-expressions)). This flag has specifier `lang`.

2.6.9 - A `-Wall` flag may be passed to `betzac`, which has the effect of passing all the following flags:

1. `-Wunused`
2. `-Wdirective`
3. `-Wlang`

This flag has specifier `all`.

---

### 2.7 Miscellaneous

#### Comments

2.7.1 - Comments can be inserted anywhere in a betza file. Text in a comment will be called commented text. Any commented text will be ignored by `betzac`.

2.7.2 Any occurrence of the `#` character will begin a comment. All text between and including the `#` character and the closest newline will be commented text.

2.7.3 Text which is not in a comment will follow the regular rules of interpretation by `betzac`.

---

# 3 Betza Expressions

This section specifies the betza language formally. It opens with a grammar, then defines the semantic interpretation of each construct.

Recall that the betza language is the collection of all valid betza expressions. A betza expression represents an absract moveset. The idea is to specify the shape and modality of movement in a general setting, so that in the context of a concrete piece that has a position and colour, its allowed movement may be determined.

## 3.1 Alphabet

The terminal alphabet consists of a small set of allowed characters:

- lowercase and uppercase latin letters (no accents allowed);
- whitespace characters `" " | "\n" | "\t" | "\r" | "\f" | "\b"`;
- digits from 0 to 9;
- symbols `"(" | "," | ")" | "<" | ">" | "-" | "[" | "]" | "{" | "}" | "*" | ":" | "+" | "?" | "!"`.

---

## 3.2 Grammar

We present the grammar of the betza language in Backus-Naur form.

```bnf
; BASIC COLLECTIONS ;

<uppercase> ::= "A" | "B" | "C" | "D" | "E" | "F" | "G" | "H" | "I" | "J" | "K" | "L" | "M" | "N" | "O" | "P" | "Q" | "R" | "S" | "T" | "U" | "V" | "W" | "X" | "Y" | "Z"

<letter> ::= <uppercase> | "a" | "b" | "c" | "d" | "e" | "f" | "g" | "h" | "i" | "j" | "k" | "l" | "m" | "n" | "o" | "p" | "q" | "r" | "s" | "t" | "u" | "v" | "w" | "x" | "y" | "z"

<nonzero-digit> ::= "1" | "2" | "3" | "4" | "5" | "6" | "7" | "8" | "9"

<digit> ::= "0" | <nonzero-digit>

<alphanumeric> ::= <letter> | <digit>

<word> ::= <alphanumeric> <word> | <alphanumeric>

<number> ::= <nonzero-digit> <number> | <digit>

<whitespace> ::= " " | "\n" | "\t" | "\r" | "\f" | "\b"

<sentence> ::= <word> " " <sentence> | <word>

; LABELS ;

<label> ::= <uppercase> | ":" <descriptor> ":"

<descriptor> ::= <sentence> | <leap>

<leap> ::= <number> "," <number>
```

In expressions, whitespace is ignored wherever it occurs — that is, outside of labels. For ease of reading, we will not define an optional whitespace symbol and clutter the following grammar description with them. It should be implicitly understood that optional whitespace can occur between any non-label terminal character of an expression.

In the following Backus-Naur form grammatical description, we retain the `BASIC COLLECTIONS` and `LABELS` definitions.

```bnf
; EXPRESSIONS ;

<betza-expr> ::= <chain-expr>

<chain-expr> ::=  <optional-expr> <chain-operator> <chain-expr> | <optional-expr>

<optional-expr> ::= "[" <betza-expr> "]" | "{" <betza-expr> "}"  | <union-expr>

<union-expr> ::= <setup-expr> <union-expr> | <setup-expr>

<setup-expr> ::= "!" <modifier-expr> | <modifier-expr>

<modifier-expr> ::= <modifiers> <exponent-expr> | <exponent-expr>

<exponent-expr> ::= <atom-expr> <exponent> | <atom-expr>

<atom-expr> ::= "(" <betza-expr> ")" | <label>

<chain-operator> ::= "--" | "-"

<modifiers> ::= <modifier> <modifiers> | <modifier>

<modifier> ::= <direction-modifier> | <behaviour>

<direction-modifier> = <amalgamated-direction> | <direction>

<amalgamated-direction> ::= "<" <direction> <direction> ">"

<direction> ::= "f" | "b" | "l" | "r" | "s" | "v" | "a"

<behaviour> ::= "c" | "g" | "i" | "j" | "m" | "n" | "p" | "y"

<exponent> ::= "0*" | <number> | <modified-chain-exponent> <number>

<modified-chain-exponent> ::= <chain-operator> <modifiers> | <modifiers>
```

---

## 3.3 Lexical Notes

TODO

## 3.4 Semantic Rules

TODO

---

## 3.5 Semantic Constraints

TODO

---

## 3.6 Examples

TODO

---

# 4 Betza Objects

TODO

# 5 Standard Prelude

# 6 Non Functional Requirements

TODO

# 7 Annexes

## Annex A - Compiler Grammar

We present a grammar for betzac semantics (without comments) in Backus-Naur form. We build upon the betza expressions grammar defined in [Section 3.2](#32-grammar).

```bnf
<source> ::= <line> | <source>

<line> ::= <directive> | <betza-stmt>

<directive> ::= <export-directive> | <using-directive> | <override-directive>

<export-directive> ::= "export" <betza-stmt>

; where <path> is any well-formed path ;
<using-directive> ::= "using" <path>

<override-directive> ::= "override" <override-arg>

<override-arg> ::= <betza-stmt> | <export-directive> | <using-directive>

<betza-stmt> ::=
      <label> "=" <betza-expr> ";"
    | <label> "=" <label> ";"
    | <label> ";"
    | <betza-expr> ";"
```

In practice, we will not reject an empty source file, but simply produce an empty output. Also, we would ignore comments either as a preprocessing step or by modifying the above grammar.
